---
layout: post
title: "Text Editors"
date: 2025-03-06
---
What you look like says a lot about you. I'm not trying to advocate for
being shallow, but that's just the way things are. An underrated
corrolary of this is that looking the part will help you be the part. My
uncle's work was going to toss out a ThinkPad because it was seven-ish
years old and its HDMI out was broken, so he gave it to me, so I could
be a Real Coder (everyone knows Real Coders, guys who hack on Linux, use
ThinkPads), and I've gotten much better at coding since. I have that
down.

Text editors are also the case. You can tell even more about someone's
coding prowess by their text editor than their machine because machines
are constrained by budget. All a new MBP says about a kid is that his
(in the CS department, that's the correct pronoun some 97% of the time)
parents have money and like him enough to blow it on a beast of a laptop
he won't ever need half the power of. Pretty much every text editor ever
is free.

*From my teenage years, my family was pretty comfortable, but my parents
are still immigrants who think that dropping two bands on a literal
computer is ridiculous. I agree with them.*

-   Below-average students seem to use IntelliJ. (Nothing against
    IntelliJ. It's a great product. If I was doing Enterprise Java, I'd
    probably use it too). I don't like debuggers, but Carmack likes
    debuggers, and he's a better programmer than I am.
-   The average student uses VS Code. (On a new MBP.)
-   The rockstar student uses VS Code **with the Vim motions** on either
    Ubuntu or the aformentioned new MBP. There are plenty of absolute
    sharks in this category-- guys with FAANG offers, guys who can
    reliably do LeetCode hards, guys who can coherently explain what
    Kubernetes does because *they used it for a side project*.
-   The most cracked of the cracked kids I've met-- two absolute genius
    wizards, much better than me at theory (and I'm a weird case of a CS
    student who really likes theory and kinda sucks at coding) ran Arch
    and absolutely Primeagen level-riced Neovim setups. Neither used a
    preconfigured distro-- I talked to both about their editors and they
    both (separately) said Linux and Neovim ricing is a literal hobby
    for them.

I use text editors a lot. Obviously, because I'm taking 18 credits, 15
of which are CS classes, I write a lot of code, but one of the things I
like to do for fun is write English. (Like I'm doing right now). I do
that in a text editor too, because Microsoft Word doesn't have Vim
keybinds-- I just use Pandoc to render my `.md` files to PDFs.

For the longest time, until about a week ago, I was using Sublime Text
with Vim emulations, and WSL2 Ubuntu. (I won't actually switch to Linux
because I need my DAW, for my guitar and vocals stuff, to work.) I
picked Sublime because it's unique-- I've never seen anyone else use it,
and secondarily because VS Code is slow as hell. (Electron apps were a
mistake.)

Sublime is actually a fantastic product. Most importantly, I did get
some "woah dude what editor is that?" Less importantly, it offers all of
VS Code's functionality that I actually used, and it isn't a browser, so
it's fast; the only issue is that you ought to pay for it. You can use
it without paying indefinitely, but it'll show you a popup saying that
it isn't free, like WinRAR. That's a popup every three hours that
reminds me how broke I am. So I'd been looking at other text editors.

The most obvious is Neovim, mostly because I'm pretty fast at the Vim
keybinds. Neovim is a great piece of software. I do like Neovim a lot;
the only issue is that a lot of people use it. It's also suprisingly
slow, even with a minimal config (no big LunarVim/etc distro or
anything)-- just line numbers and a new color theme, no LSP support or
fuzzy finder. There's a GUI for it, called Neovide, which is pretty
solid-- I used it for a couple weeks, but I found a better option that's
both nicer to use and gives me a leg up in the "I have a more esoteric
setup than you" arms race (that only exists in my own mind).

What I'm writing this on is Emacs. I'm using a minimal, largely theme-based
distro, called NANO. (Not to be confused with the text editor.) Besides actually
writing elisp, I've applied significant customizations to make it similar
to VS Code in functionality. It's much snappier than Neovim in the terminal window,
the key chords appeal to my guitarist sensibilities, but unlike VS Code, it's
fast and the modal keybinds (like my beloved macros and `:%s`) feel good.

However, the biggest benefit is that no one uses Emacs, so I get to be a
special snowflake. Take that!
